Went into the Tottenham Court Road store today. If it weren't for the slight
risk of dipping into my overdraft, I would be posting this reply from a pixel.

To maintain objectivity, I brought along a techy-minded friend from work along
to review the shit specs out of it.

First impressions; it's a compact, solidly built device that I can easily see
myself carrying around everywhere. University friends know that a X61 tablet
never left my side, so I have done this before.

The Google sales rep gave us the quick tour and decided to show off the screen
capabilities. What can I say, the web works in 3:2 with an insanely high
resolution. Not as dense as a Nexus, but still stupidly high that we couldn't
make out individual pixels. 4K looks awesome on this thing.

After a quick poke around (it's touchscreen!) we decided to enable a few
chrome://flags. FPS monitor in the top right, some extra rendering shortcuts
and other goodies. Most importantly, we enabled the pinch zoom and 3 finger
gestures. Not sure why it's disabled by default. A quick browser restart and
now we're ready to make objective assessments.

The new tab page renders at an easy 60fps, static and non-media pages load and
stabilize at ~30fps. We fired up some of the Chrome Experiments and had good
performance in general, smooth rendering and functionality that works using
either the mac-esque trackpad or direct manipulations on the screen.

The most graphically intensive Experiment is the "[Way to
Oz](http://www.chromeexperiments.com/detail/find-your-way-to-oz/?f=)", set to
HD mode, it looks stunning, but the framerate dropped to 10fps, which as any
gamer knows, starts to gnaw at you. Allowing the Chromebook to degrade the
graphics quality and optimize for speed, then the Myst-like environment is
responsive again. I work with real-time video communications at work, and the
graphics quality degraded easily to SD as I am used to.

Unfortunately we tried playing a few 4k YouTube videos, but found a suspicious
amount of frame dropping. Loading the same videos up on the Samsung ARM
Chromebook next to it didn't have this problem (so ruled out the in store
wireless as the problem). Not entirely sure what was going on, but we think
that the ARM was selecting HTML5 video instead of flash that the pixel
selected. I'll also note that we tried the same thing on the MacBook Airs and
Pro Retinas which have the same computing grunt (current gen Core i5 with
Intel 4000 on board graphics) and they also showed this issue. We suspect that
there's something wrong with the media pipeline because we know that the much
less powerful Chromebooks can handle this media just fine.

Back to exploring the web. On the insistence of the sales rep, we found
ourselves using the touchscreen a lot. Hyperlinking, as a concept and UI
element, really work when you poke and prod them. With one of us poking the
screen, and the other using the trackpad to make decisions about what to test
next, prodding, swiping and flicking the internet is a few fractions of a
second quicker than two (or three) finger scrolling. I'll also point out
another UI element that we didn't expect but seems completely natural now, two
finger taps (on the screen) is a right click! This is the only touch device
that I have seen that does that. iPads and Androids use the long press
mechanism to bring up context menus. My ThinkPad X61 tablet was more precise
with a wacom digitizer, but even that has an extra button that would enable
right-click-mode-on-tap.

Another experiment we did was to test the video capabilities of the
Chromebook. We fired up Hangouts, whipped out a Nexus 4 and it worked. SD
video from the phone, but considering that he was attached to 3G, the latency
was impressive and audio was clear.

The model in store was the non-LTE version. There isn't a 3G version, and LTE
seems a bit useless in this country right now. What I would do instead is use
my [giffgaff](http://giffgaff.com/orders/affiliate/bencord0), the Â£12 goodybag
allows unlimited data and tethering!

Leaving the store impressed, we asked ourselves, "would you get one?".

My friend's answer is no. But contrasting to the Apple products in the same
price range, the Chromebook is a better product for either of us. The MacBook
Air(s) are equivalently spec'ed, have larger local storage but don't have the
retina displays or touch inputs. The smaller MacBook Pro (with retina display)
which also has the same CPU/GPU spec, is relatively chunky and doesn't have
touch.

While all of these devices are good little computers (I think the current term
is "Ultrabook"), they all stumble when you get to the limits of the Intel 4000
graphics card.

I, on the other hand, don't see Google's Chrome OS as a stripped down and
limited, Operating System. Flip the dev switch, install chromium OS, run a
[devserver](http://www.chromium.org/chromium-os/how-tos-and-troubleshooting
/using-the-dev-server) and install dev-vcs/git, app-editors/vim and friends.
To me, that is a fully functional computer. Linux based, (libre)free and
hackable. Something that I cannot say for the Apple competition.